---
layout: post
title: Mini smart scale
subtitle: Using pyboard,, HX711 and a load cell to gather weight data
show-avatar: false
tags: [IoT, microcontroller, python]
---

### Equipment
- [Pyboard][pyb]
- [Generic load cell + HX711 breakout][load-cell]
- Breadboard and jumper wires
- My computer

This is a fairly basic guide to setting up a pyboard to take readings from a load cell using existing libraries. I assume familiarity with python and the pyboard.

I realise the pyboard probably isn't the best board to use for this and has no built in wireless capability. It does however provide a lot of useful features for testing such as built in buttons and LEDs (it even has an on-board accelerometer!).

### Software
I used [this thread][forum] to help me. There are a few drivers for HX711 on micropython and I tested with a Raspberry pi as well using [this tutorial][pi] for guidance.

There is a somewhat official driver [here][off-driver] that I used for this project.

### Set up
My HX711 came with a set of unsoldered headers which I soldered on and used to plug into the breadboard, then I set up jumper wires from the 5V and ground on the pyboard to their respective sockets on the breadboard. I used a further set of jumper wires which I colour-coded to match the colours on the load cell to link the load cell to the HX711, by leaving the colour-coded jumper wires attached to the board it is far easier to tell which wire from the load cell goes where.

The hx711.py driver comes with an example scales.py file including a Scales class I used this, unfortunately the pyboard has pins with string names and cannot work with integer values which are often presupposed as they are common on other boards. I chose to use X5 and X6 pins so I used the following with the Scales class.
```python
Scales(pd_sck='X6', dout='X5'):
```
Whichever pins are chosen it is important to use quotes as the pyboard only accepts pin names as strings.

Copy the files over to the pyboard's internal storage then eject and restart the board. Now we can start to interface with our load cell.

### Getting readings
The Scales class in the example has raw and stable readings, and tare functions available. Importing the Scales class: `from scales import Scales` lets us create an object with the pins specified.

```python
my_load_cell = Scales(do_out='pin', pd_sck='pin') 
```
Now we can call `my_load_cell.raw_value()` to get the current value for the load cell, similarly we can tare and get the stable values by calling those functions:

```python
my_load_cell.tare()
my_load_cell.stable_value()
my_load_cell.offset # shows the value of offset for the tared weight
```

### Making it smarter
Pyboard can do a lot more than just getting readings, we can interface with other systems either on the board or externally, using scripts to define actions. I will show how to use the onboard button to call the tare function, we can use the pyb library to set up the switch and then use the callback method to interrupt and call the tare function.

First lets set up the built in switch as a tare button:
1. `from pyb import Switch` in the main.py file
1. Load the switch object with `sw = Switch()`
1. Create a callback to run the tare function when the switch is pressed
```python
sw.callback(my_load_cell.tare)
```

Now we can try this out by asking checking the offset and then pressing our tare and seeing if it is changed.

```python
my_load_cell.offset
# Press button
my_load_cell.offset
```

The button should run the tare function which will create a new offset. Since the callback method acts as an interrupt we can even create a loop to repeatedly measure the weight and then use the switch to tare at any time while the loop runs.

```python
while True:
    print(my_load_cell.stable_value())

# Press the button and see that it should tare the value back to zero.
```

[pyb]:https://store.micropython.org/product/PYBv1.1H
[load-cell]:https://uk.banggood.com/HX711-24bit-AD-Module-1kg-Aluminum-Alloy-Scale-Weighing-Sensor-Switch-Load-Cell-Kit-p-1124935.html?rmmds=search
[forum]:https://forum.micropython.org/viewtopic.php?f=16&t=2678&sid=c3ffcfd86313aeaf2138712b5e3377f6
[pi]:https://tutorials-raspberrypi.com/digital-raspberry-pi-scale-weight-sensor-hx711/
[my-driver]:https://github.com/HowManyOliversAreThere/hx711_mpy-driver
[off-driver]:https://github.com/SergeyPiskunov/micropython-hx711
